# METADATA.json File Specification

The `METADATA.json` file is a [JSON](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSON)-formatted metadata file that contains some information about the font files served by Google Fonts, some of which typically corresponds to font file internal metadata.

The file can be partially generated by passing a directory containing TTF files to the [fontbakery](https://github.com/googlefonts/fontbakery) `fontbakery-build-metadata.py` script.

The file uses [UTF-8](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/UTF-8) encoding, though it may also include backslashed Unicode characters in form of `\u00e1`. 
Below is an example `METADATA.json` file for [/ofl/abeezee](ofl/abeezee/METADATA.json): 

```
{
  "name": "ABeeZee",
  "designer": "Anja Meiners",
  "license": "OFL",
  "visibility": "Sandbox",
  "category": "Sans Serif",
  "size": 24918,
  "fonts": [
    {
      "name": "ABeeZee",
      "postScriptName": "ABeeZee-Italic",
      "fullName": "ABeeZee Italic",
      "style": "italic",
      "weight": 400,
      "filename": "ABeeZee-Italic.ttf",
      "copyright": "Copyright (c) 2011 by Anja Meiners (www.carrois.com post@carrois.com), with Reserved Font Name 'ABeeZee'"
    },
    {
      "name": "ABeeZee",
      "postScriptName": "ABeeZee-Regular",
      "fullName": "ABeeZee",
      "style": "normal",
      "weight": 400,
      "filename": "ABeeZee-Regular.ttf",
      "copyright": "Copyright (c) 2011 by Anja Meiners (www.carrois.com post@carrois.com), with Reserved Font Name 'ABeeZee'"
    }
  ],
  "subsets": [
    "latin",
    "menu"
  ],
  "dateAdded": "2012-09-30"
}
```

Below is a brief description of the top-level fields of `METADATA.json` which provide unique information which is generally not derived from the font files themselves.
Each top-level field can only occur once in the file.

### `license`

Declares the license of the fonts in the family. 
Can contain one of 3 possible values:

* `"license": "Apache2"`
* `"license": "OFL"`
* `"license": "UFL"`

### `visibility`

Determines the current release status of the font on Google Fonts. 
One of 3 possible values:

* `"visibility": "External"` — font available on Google Fonts (both website and API)
* `"visibility": "Sandbox"` — font will be available shortly on Google Fonts (being tested)
* `"visibility": "Internal"` — the font will be served by the Google Fonts API but is not listed on the Google Fonts website

### `category`

Typographic classification, one of 5 possible values:

* `"category": "Serif"`
* `"category": "Sans Serif"`
* `"category": "Display"`
* `"category": "Handwriting"`
* `"category": "Monospace"`

### `dateAdded`

Date in `YYYY-MM-DD` format that the font was first published by Google Fonts, so can be in the future. 
It used to order the "Date added" sort in the [directory](http://www.google.com/fonts/). 
Example:

* `"dateAdded": "2012-09-30"`

### `name`

The family name used to call the fonts from the Google Fonts API, and shown in the directory. 
Example:

* `"name": "ABeeZee"`

### `designer`

The full name of the type designer(s) or foundry who designed the fonts. 
Examples:

* `"designer": "Anja Meiners"` — An individual's name is preferred; typically there is an individual who is the principle designer of the typeface family, even if they are no longer the primary maintainer of the project
* `"designer": "Multiple Designers"` — This is used when several people are involved in the design of a project, but are not working in a formal organization, or listing all their names would be too long to work well in the directory
* `"designer": "TypeTogether"` — Sometimes a formal organization designs a family and no individual there can be attributed as the principle designer
* `"designer": "Huerta Tipográfica"` — Non-ascii characters are supported as UTF-8
* `"designer": "Huerta Tipogr\u00e1fica"` — Sometimes non-ascii characters are encoded this way

### `fonts`

A dictionary of entries that point to font files in each family. 
Example:

```
{
	"name": "ABeeZee",
	"postScriptName": "ABeeZee-Italic",
	"fullName": "ABeeZee Italic",
	"style": "italic",
	"weight": 400,
	"filename": "ABeeZee-Italic.ttf",
	"copyright": "Copyright (c) 2011 by Anja Meiners, with Reserved Font Name 'ABeeZee'"
},
```

The info in this section is typically derived from the information included inside the font files. 

### `subsets`

List of all character subsets available in Google Fonts API for the given font family. 
12 possible values:

* `"latin"`
* `"latin-ext"`
* `"cyrillic"`
* `"cyrillic-ext"`
* `"greek"`
* `"greek-ext"`
* `"vietnamese"`
* `"khmer"`
* `"devanagari"`
* `"telugu"`
* `"arabic"`
* `"hebrew"`
