The Tuareg, by tradition, are desert dwellers. Before colonization, they inhabited an area called Tamazgha, which stretched from the Atlantic Ocean on the west to the Red Sea on the east. Over centuries, they have found themselves displaced and separated by boundaries imposed on Afrika by colonizers.

Today the Tuareg are found in Algeria, Libya, Niger, Mali, and Burkina Faso. The main Tuareg groups are: Ahaggar from Algeria, Ghat from Libya, Air from Niger, Azawagh from Niger-Mali, and Adghagh from Mali. To this day, the Tuareg exist in an uneasy alliance with countries that have swallowed them, and there have been numerous clashes. Reports by human rights groups like the United Nations high Commission for Refugees have shown grave abuses against them. Berber is the name that has been given to these heterogeneous nomadic peoples and to the group of related languages they speak. Tifinagh is an alphabet from North Afrika, West Afrika, and the Sahara Desert. It is spoken by the Arab-speaking people of Morocco and Libya. In the West Afrikan countries of Niger, Mali, and Burkina Faso, the Tuareg people use Tifinagh exclusively as their alphabet. 

A text in Neo-Tifinagh
Tⵉⴼⵉⵏⴰⴳⵃ ⵉⵙ ⴰⵏ ⴰⵍⵒⵃⴰⴱⴻⵜ ⴼⵖⵧⵎ Nⵧⵖⵜⵃ Aⴼⵖⵉⴽⴰ Wⴻⵙⵜ Aⴼⵖⵉⴽⴰ, ⴰⵏⴷ ⵜⵃⴻ Sⴰⵃⴰⵖⴰ Dⴻⵙⴻⵖⵜ. Iⵜ ⵉⵙ ⵙⵒⵧⴽⴻⵏ ⴱy ⵜⵃⴻ Aⵖⴰⴱ ⵙⵒⴻⴰⴽⵉⵏⴳ ⵒⴻⵧⵒⵍⴻ ⵧⴼ Mⵧⵖⵖⵧⴿⴿⵧ ⴰⵏⴷ Lyⴱⵉⴰ. Iⵏ ⵜⵃⴻ Wⴻⵙⵜ Aⴼⵖⵉⴽⴰⵏ ⴿⵧⵓⵏⵜⵖⵉⴻⵙ ⵧⴼ Nⵉⴳⴻⵖ, Mⴰⵍⵉ, ⴰⵏⴷ Bⵓⵖⴽⵉⵏⴰ Fⴰⵙⵧ, ⵜⵃⴻ Tⵓⴰⵖⴻⴳ ⵒⴻⵧⵒⵍⴻ ⵓⵙⴻ Tⵉⴼⵉⵏⴰⴳⵃ ⴻⵅⴿⵍⵓⵙⵉⵠⴻⵍy ⴰⵙ ⵜⵃⴻⵉⵖ ⴰⵍⵒⵃⴰⴱⴻⵜ.

Berber merchants have been responsible for bringing goods on camels from the northern end of the Sahara to the great cities of the South. The Berber alphabet in its earliest form existed for 2000 years and is used to write the languages of northwest Afrika. The Tuareg also use it to write the Tuareg languages. This script, called Tifinagh, is thought to mean “Punic/Phoenician” in the Berber language. Like other Berber scripts, it has remained largely unchanged over time as a consonant-only alphabet, although vowels have been added recently. Tifinagh has resisted the influence of foreign systems like the Roman and Arabic alphabets. It has been used in coded messages in games, or directions inscribed on rocks as a guide to finding water or game in the desert. It is also used to pass on secret messages and write private letters.

Neo-Tifinagh, which was developed in the 1960s and was based on Tuareg Tifinagh, but was specifically devised to represent the Berber dialects of the Maghreb, especially in Morocco and Algeria, particularly in Kabylia. A variant of Neo-Tifinagh was the form put forward by the Royal Institute for Amazigh Culture in Morocco. 

In January 2003, the Tifinagh alphabet was adopted over the Roman and Arabic alphabets by the Administrative Council of the Royal Institute for Amazigh Culture to teach Amazigh, the Berber language used in Morocco. French designer and typographer Pierre di Sciullo digitized the alphabet, which can be downloaded from writing-system.tumblr.com/tagged/Tifinagh.

This is a major culture victory for this minority group, which could mean their survival as they become more and more assimilated into the countries surrounding them.

In recent years, it has undergone Unicode encoding and there are several digital fonts that have been developed as a result of this.

ⴽⵓ ⵢⴰⵏ ⵉⵍⵍⴰ ⴷⴰⵔⵙ ⵓⵣⵔⴼ ⵏ ⴳ ⵜⴷⵔⴼⵉⵜ ⵏ ⵓⵙⵡⵉⵏⴳⵎ ⴷ ⵜⵉⵏ ⵜⴰⵏⵏⴰⵢⵜ, ⴷ ⵜⵉⵏ ⵓⵙⴳⴷ ⵖⵉⵍⵍⴰ ⵉⵍⵍⴰ ⵓⵣⵔⴼ ⴰⴷ ⵉⵙⵏⴼ ⴰⵙⴳⵖⵏⵏⵙ, ⵢⵉⵍⵍⵉ ⴷⴰⵔⵙ ⴰⵡⴷ ⵓⵣⵔⴼ ⵏ ⵜⵡⵏⵏⵉⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴼⵔⵓⵜ ⵙ ⴽⵔⴰ ⵉⴳⴰⵜ ⴰⵏⴰ ⵏⵏⵙ. ⴽⵓ ⵢⴰⵏ ⵉⵍⵍⴰ ⴷⴰⵔⵙ ⵓⵣⵔⴼ ⵏ ⵜⴷⵔⴼⵉⵜ ⵏ ⵜⴰⵏⵏⴰⵢⵜ ⴷ ⵜⵡⵏⵏⵉⵜ, ⴰⴷ ⵉⵜⵜⵉⴽⵚⵓⴹ ⵅⴼ ⵜⴰⵏⵏⴰⵢⵉⵏ ⵏⵏⵙ ⵓⵍⴰ ⴰⵔⵣⵣⵓ ⵏⵏⵙ ⴰⴷ ⵢⴰⵎⵥ ⵏⵖ ⴰⴷ ⵉⵣⵓⵣⵣⵔ, ⴰⴱⵍⴰ ⵉⵡⵜⵜⴰ, ⵉⵏⵖⵎⵉⵙⵏ ⴷ ⵜⵡⵏⴳⵉⵎⵉⵏ ⵙ ⴰⴽⵯ ⵉⵎⴰⵙⵙⵏ ⵓⵙⵓⵙⵙⵏ.

Jamra-Patel , type designers based in Maine, released Noto Sans Tifinagh, which is a redesign of the original font. Mark Jamra explains:

“Like other writing systems that started over a thousand years ago, early Tifinagh forms had geometric roots. However, modern writing implements have since given Tifinagh a more expressive and organic appearance. While the Noto font family is a geometric sans, the original Noto Sans Tifinagh font took this to an extreme, by constructing everything from mathematically perfect circles and squares. Our goal was to subtly soften the design so that it still fits in the rest of the Noto Sans family without feeling as rigid as the original design. To achieve this, we designed the rounded forms to look more like those we see in handwritten Tifinagh and Amazigh publications. We also adjusted proportions to improve the overall color and rhythm of the full character set. There is an interesting phenomenon when it comes to geometric forms type design. For the Latin script, geometric designs are perceived as modern, however when this treatment is applied to African scripts, people perceive them as primitive and unsophisticated. We often try to integrate the human aspect of written forms into the typeface, to change how African scripts are perceived.”
