There is a growing movement on the continent to spell Afrika with a “k” mainly because there isn’t a single Afrikan language where “c” is a “k” sound—not one. It is part of the decolonization process that is sweeping across the continent. It is important for us Afrikans to decide how we want Afrika to be spelt.

The history of Afrika was always told by those who colonized her, leading to a situation where the rest of the world—and, in some cases, Afrikans themselves—believed that history. For the longest time, it was widely beloved that Sub-Saharan Afrika did not have a tradition of writing. But, things have changed within the past few decades as Afrikans have become experts, conducting research and telling their own stories.There are societies in Afrika that invented writing systems for their people. For some unknown reason, most of this activity was concentrated in West Afrika, although there were inventions from Central, Eastern and Southern Afrika as well.

My journey towards discovering the writing systems of Afrika did not happen in a classroom. We were not taught about writing systems throughout primary school, high school, or university on the continent. The history we were taught portrayed Europe as the conqueror and the colonies as the conquered. Indeed, the magnificent monument called “The Great Zimbabwe”—which has been designated a World Heritage Site and is a magnificent architectural, engineering, and design feat—could not have been built by us natives! We were told the Phoenicians must have built it. Why? All because of a single beam of cedar wood found on the main entrance to the Great Enclosure! It turned out that cedar is found in the surrounding forests. The story of Afrika cannot be told without referencing the dark period of its colonization. They called Afrika “The Dark Continent” yet the darkness was the colonization of that continent.

I got interested in the writing systems from sub-Saharan Afrika after I was asked by the Head of Department of the Yale Graphic Design Graduate Program, Alvin Eisenmann, what characters my language of Shona was written in. That question (which was asked during the interview for admission into the MFA Graphic Design program) surprised me, because up to that point, I’d never heard of African societies that developed their very own writing systems. Of course, we had learned about Egypt’s contribution, but that was it. “Civilization,” it seemed, was brought to us by Europeans. The saying that, “Until the Story of the hunt is told by the Lion, the tale of the hunt will always glorify the hunter,” rings so true to our experience as Afrikans.

My thesis, which I called Writing Systems from African Societies, was received with much praise by Alvin, who encouraged me to publish it. I had clearly stated in it that there was a need for more research to be carried out in the field in Afrika—and that this was only a synopsi—so I resisted the idea of publishing it. It took me almost twenty years to get a willing publisher, even though I had tried ceaselessly. They all balked, saying that the book had no mass market appeal, and that it belonged to academic publishers like Yale Press or Princeton Press. I did not believe this, so I persevered until my luck changed when, in 2002, I met Mark Batty, who was launching the fledgling Mark Batty Publisher company. He was from a typography and design background, so he got it. He promised to give me a beautiful and colorful book—I designed the book myself—and he delivered on his promise. The book was published in 2004 to critical acclaim. To me, the one big issue was that it was only distributed in the Americas and Europe, not in Afrika, where it belonged. Fortunately, some copies found their way to Nigeria, Kenya, and South Afrika, but it sold out very quickly in those markets.

The book was a big seller in the markets of the Americas, Europe, and Japan, where I received congratulatory messages from scholars of history, students of design, designers, the general public, and—the big surprise—parents whose young children fell in love with the book! People were stunned that there was such a history that had been suppressed, and Afrikans were proud to learn of their contributions to the story of humanity’s achievements. I was popular on the design conference circuit, where the book was widely received. The revelation that Afrika developed her own writing systems intrigued some, but did not surprise those who were students of real Afrikan histor—those who knew all along that there was a well-crafted plan to suppress Afrika’s contributions to “civilization”. The book therefore became a source of pride to those who are proud of being Afrikan.

The book had twenty-one scripts: Adinkra Symbols, Bantu Symbol Writing (Nguni Symbol Writing), Tifinagh, Ethiopic, Vai, Mende (Ki Ka Ku), Bambara (Ma Sa Ba), Loma, Kpelle, Bamum, Nsibidi, Anaforuana, Djuka, Bassa Vah Script, Somali Script, Wolof, Manenka N'Ko, Fula, Fula Dita, Bete Script, and Gola.

Fast-forward to today: there has been a lot of activity in terms of Afrikan writing systems. It is now a popular topic on social media, where groups have been formed to share information and to introduce new scripts. There are Afrikan Studies programs that have dedicated a good part of their curriculum to the study of African scripts. Dr. Konrad Tuchscherer comes to mind here. He’s an Associate Professor of History & Africana Studies at St. John’s University, New York. Most importantly, though, he’s Co-Director of the Bamum Scripts and Archives Project at the Royal Palace of Bamum Kings, in Foumban, Cameroon. He is very knowledgeable about the Bamum script and other Afrikan writing systems. In his book, Inscribing Meaning, Writing and Graphic Systems in Afrikan Art, Dr. Tuchsherer says:
“Scripts are systems of interrelated symbols used to encode and transmit meaning. In the visual arts, they can be used for the beauty, plasticity and rhythm of their forms or as vehicles to assert identity, contest authority and embody the divine.”
 
In Afrika, these scripts take a variety of forms. Some are: phonetic alphabets, in which letters or characters represent the sounds of a language; or syllabaries, in which symbols represent the syllables that make up words. Others are: ideographic, composed of abstract symbols that convey concepts, ideas or things; or pictographic, where the symbol depicts the object it represents. Systems of graphic inscription—such as ideograms or pictographs—co-exist with written systems, are linked with spoken language and ideas, and function much as writing does to record, archive, and transmit knowledge and information.
 
All of these scripts possess a dramatic, visual power that has inspired artists to deploy them in myriad ways and contexts. Whether inscribed on ritual or everyday objects, textiles, the human body, or in books, these Afrikan scripts are more than technologies of communication. They constitute versatile, aesthetically potent ways of knowing and affecting the world.
 
There also are type design studios like Jamra Patel, based in Maine, who have developed some writing systems into digital fonts. They have released a suite of Afrikan typefaces called Kigelia. 
 
Lastly but by no means least, is the Missing Scripts Project, an initiative to design a glyph each for the world’s known 293 writing systems—of which 27 are Afrikan, and of these, 21 scripts are still in use:
 
Sahara: Tifinagh 3c – today,Ethiopia & Eriteria: Ge’ez 4c – today, Liberia: Vai 1830 – today, Cameroon: Bamum 1896 – today, South Afrika: Isibheqe Sohlamvu 20 C – today, Liberia: Bassa Vah 1907 – today, Loma 1930s – today,  Kpelle 1930s – today, Sierra Leone: Mende Kikakui 1917 – today, Nigeria: Medefaidrin 1930s – today, Mali: Masaba 1930s – today, Somalia: Borama 1933 – today, Kaddare 1952 – today 
Cote d’Ivoire, Mali, Burkina Faso, Senegal, Guinea, Sierra Leone: N’Ko 1949 – today, Cote d’Ivoire: Bété 1956 – today, Senegal: Garay (Wolof) 1961 – today, DRC Congo: Mandombe 1978 – today, Malawi: Mwangwego 1979 – today, Guinea, Nigeria, Liberia: Adlam 1989 – today, Sudan: Beria 1980s – today, Kenya: Luo 2009 – today, Guinea: Kore Sebeli 2009 – today.

There is a growing number of Afrikan writing systems that are undergoing encoding in Unicode, which allows them to be used on computers and other devices and across operating systems. Unicode allows them to be digitized as fonts. Deborah Anderson,  Script Encoding Initiative, UC Berkeley, sheds more light on Unicode implementation:
After a script has been published in the Unicode Standard, fonts and an input mechanism, such as a keyboard, are needed in order to type the letters and symbols. Depending upon the script, an update to the rendering engine may also be needed, so the script’s letters and symbols appear on the computer or device screen correctly and so they behave as expected.
 
Ideally, the Unicode-based font and keyboard for the script should be included on the computer or device’s list of preloaded fonts (a “system font”) and keyboards, but this typically is not available until a year (or more) after a script has been published in Unicode. If a Unicode-based font is available, it can be downloaded and installed on desktops and laptops, but manually adding a font to a mobile device is currently difficult. If a Unicode-based keyboard for the writing system is available, it can be downloaded and installed on computers and mobile devices.
 
The incorporation of other features in software, such as localized calendars and user menus in the newly encoded script, require data to be submitted and published in the Unicode Common Locale Data Repository, a project that is widely supported. Typically, collection and publication of such information lags behind the appearance of a script in the Unicode Standard by several years. Submission of such localized data benefits greatly from involvement of the user community.
 
The next writing systems I will discuss are Tifinagh of West and North Afrika, and the Bamum script invented by King Njoya of the Bamum kingdom headquartered  in Foumban, Cameroon. Both of them have undergone Unicode encoding and a number of typefaces have already been designed.
 

Sources: ANRT/IDG/SEI and www.worldswritingsystems.org
